content/posts/Bash_Cheatsheet/index.md, before:

---
title: "Bash Scripting Cheatsheet"
description: "A rapid guide to look at when doing some scripts as it may help when forgetting something."
date: 2019-10-22
lastmod: 2020-08-06T00:50:52+02:00
author: "Pablo Jesús González Rubio"
cover: ""
coverAlt: ""
toc: true
tags: [ "Cheatsheet", "Bash" ]
---

You can download the cheatsheet as a pdf from [here](./bash.pdf)!

This is a rapid guide to look at when doing some scripts as it may help when forgetting something.

It is oriented to a beginner-intermediate level of usage. So I will take for granted you know some things about it.

If not, it would be very extensive. However, if you think you need a more in-depth guide, contact me and I’ll make a guide!

## Programming

### Variables

Variables in bash aren't like in C that you have to declare them before using them and which type of data are they. They can't start with a number.

In Bash, variables can take any form, much like in Python.

  ```bash
  var1 = 1
  var2 = 1.5
  var3 = hello
  # var4 will get the result of the bash function
  var4 = $(whoami)
  ```

To call the value of a variable and use it in another function:

  ```Bash
  # To call the value of var 4:
  $var4
  ```

To read a value from STDIN (user input):

  ```Bash
  read text
  echo "You wrote: $text"
  ```

For arrays just:

```Bash
declare -a ARRAY_VARIABLE
# To fill an array with values:
for (i=0;i<n;i++);do
  ARRAY_VARIABLE[$i]=VALUE
  #ARRAY_VARIABLE[$i]="VALUE"
done
```

To call an array with variable index:

`${ARRAY_VARIABLE[$POSITION]}`

### Important for conditions

Arithmetic operators:

- `-eq` : is equal to
- `-ne` : not equal to
- `-gt` : greater than
- `-ge` : greater than or equal to
- `-lt` : less than
- `-le` : less than or equal to

Strings operators:

```bash
if [ $VARIABLE = "string" ]; then
  # commands
fi
```

```bash
if [[ $VARIABLE == "string" ]]; then
  # commands
fi
```

### Conditions: if, elif, case

In the conditions, it's super important to leave one blank space after the first `[` and one before the `]`.

- `if`

```bash
if [ conditions ]
then
  commands
fi
```

- `elif` (If the condition before this one hasn't matched)

```bash
if [ conditions ]
then
  commands
fi

elif [ conditions ]
then
  commands
fi
```
- `else` (If no condition has matched)
- `case` (It's a Switch)

```bash
var = #some input
case $VARIABLE in
  value1)
    commands
    ;;
  valueN)
    commands
    ;; #Like a Break
  *)
    # This is default value
    # Used when the value of VARIABLE is not valid
    commands
    ;;
esac
```

:warning: In Bash, it's not like C, we have to end all the values with `;;`.

Otherwise, the program will not work.

### Loop: for

```bash
for VARIABLE in 1 2 3 4 5 .. N
do
  command1
  //...
  commandN
done
```

- `$@` Is an array with all the arguments.
- `$#` Is the number or passed arguments.
- `$1` Selects the first argument.
- `$i` Calls the value of *i* variable.

### Loop: while/until

```bash
while [ condition ]
do
  command1
  command2
  command3
done
```

```bash
# Similar to while
# Does the loop until the condition is true, then stops.
until [ condition ]
do
  command1
  command2
  command3
done
```

### Functions

```bash
# They are much like in C.
# You have to write the function in the upper part
# and the call to the function at the end.

function FUNCTION_NAME {
  commands
  # commands with parameter:
  echo $1
}

...

# There's no need in supplying parameters if the function doesn't need one
FUNCTION_NAME paratemer1 ... parameterN
```

### Traps

A trap is a function to modify the program behaviour based on user keyboard combinations.

i.e: When you pulse `Ctrl + C` the program usually aborts, that's because the Operative System sends a `SIGINT` signal to make it abort if it was a `SIGKILL` it would actually assassinate the program in the act without letting it finish normally. Well, with a *trap* you can alter that behaviour into calling a function. This has the advantage of doing some cleanup before the program ends for example.
It can also make a call to another function if it detects another type of signal like a `SIGCHLD`, when a child of a parent process has died.

```bash
# Trap for Ctrl + C
trap ctrl_c INT

function ctrl_c(){
  commands when pulsed Ctrl + C
  //The program will finnish after the commands
}
```

## Useful commands

**This command verifies a program is installed in the PC**:

```bash
command -v PROGRAM >/dev/null 2>&1 || {echo >&2 "PROGRAM is not installed. Aborting."; exit 1;}
# Sends the results to null and only return if it's not installed.
# This could be modified to ask to install or whatever.
```

**Verifies if a file or directory exists**.

```bash
FILE=/path/to/file/file.ext
if [ -f "$FILE" ]; then
    echo "$FILE exist."
else
    echo "$FILE doesn't exist."
fi
```

```bash
# If just verifying a file doesn't exists.
FILE==/path/to/file/file.ext
if [ ! -f "$FILE" ]; then
    echo "$FILE doesn't exist."
fi
```

**Parses text of a delimited file (E.G: `*.csv`)**

```bash
FILE="/path/to/file/file.ext"
i=0
while IFS='=' read VALUE1 ... VALUEN
do
      echo "$i value : $VALUE1"
      # ...
      echo "$i value : $VALUEN"
done < $FILE
```

In this fragment of code, we are taking the values of a file delimited by `=` and echoing the values of it.
Instead of echoing them, you can input them into a variable you're going to use later, or else.

E.G: `tea = delicious` then `VALUE1 = tea`, and `VALUE2 = delicious`.

**This command searches for specific words or text in some text:**

```bash
grep ARGUMENT
  -w, --word-regexp         	 match only whole words
  -x, --line-regexp         	 match only whole lines
  -v, --invert-match        	 select non-matching lines
  -m, --max-count=NUM       	 stop after NUM selected lines
  -H, --with-filename       	 print file name with output lines
  -r, --recursive           	 greps also in directories
  -R, --dereference-recursive  also follows all symlinks
  -L, --files-without-match  	 print only names of FILEs with no selected lines
  -l, --files-with-matches  	 print only names of FILEs with selected lines
  -c, --count               	 print only a count of selected lines per FILE
```

I usually use a lot the `-v` and the `-r` arguments. 

**This command cuts text. Useful to select parts of repetitive static information.**

  ```bash
  cut ARGUMENTS
    -b, --bytes=LIST        select only these bytes
    -c, --characters=LIST   select only these characters
    -d, --delimiter=DELIM   use DELIM instead of TAB for field delimiter
    -f, --fields=LIST       select only these fields;  also print any line

  cut -d 1-7 #Will only select the info between character 1 and 7
  ```

***'Awk'* a language for text processing:**

  ```bash
  # Supossing we cat a file and it returns:
  # This is a file
  awk '{print $1}' thatfile.txt
  # Or
  cat thatfile.txt | awk '{print $1}'
  # Will return 'This'
  ```

  ```bash
  # This will return column 2 elements that match the pattern.
  awk ' /'PATTERN'/ {print $2} '
  ```

Awk is very extensive so [this link](https://linuxconfig.org/learning-linux-commands-awk) can be useful for those who wants to learn more. Sed is another very similar program.

## EOF

Here ends the article for now. If while reading this you missed something, contact me and I'll upload it as fast as I can!

Commit message:

Linux Audit post & fix Bash Cheatsheet

content/posts/Bash_Cheatsheet/index.md, after:

---
title: "Bash Scripting Cheatsheet"
description: "A rapid guide to look at when doing some scripts as it may help when forgetting something."
date: 2019-10-22
lastmod: 2020-08-06T00:50:52+02:00
author: "Pablo Jesús González Rubio"
cover: ""
coverAlt: ""
toc: true
tags: [ "Cheatsheet", "Bash" ]
---

This is a fast guide to look at when doing some scripts as it may help when forgetting something.

It is oriented to a beginner-intermediate level of usage. So I will take for granted you know some things about it.

If not, it would be very extensive. However, if you think you need a more in-depth guide, contact me and I’ll make a guide!

## Programming

### Variables

Variables in bash aren't like in C that you have to declare them before using them and which type of data are they. They can't start with a number.

In Bash, variables can take any form, much like in Python.

  ```bash
  var1 = 1
  var2 = 1.5
  var3 = hello
  # var4 will get the result of the bash function
  var4 = $(whoami)
  ```

To call the value of a variable and use it in another function:

  ```Bash
  # To call the value of var 4:
  $var4
  ```

To read a value from STDIN (user input):

  ```Bash
  read text
  echo "You wrote: $text"
  ```

For arrays just:

```Bash
declare -a ARRAY_VARIABLE
# To fill an array with values:
for (i=0;i<n;i++);do
  ARRAY_VARIABLE[$i]=VALUE
  #ARRAY_VARIABLE[$i]="VALUE"
done
```

To call an array with variable index:

`${ARRAY_VARIABLE[$POSITION]}`

### Important for conditions

Arithmetic operators:

- `-eq` : is equal to
- `-ne` : not equal to
- `-gt` : greater than
- `-ge` : greater than or equal to
- `-lt` : less than
- `-le` : less than or equal to

Strings operators:

```bash
if [ $VARIABLE = "string" ]; then
  # commands
fi
```

```bash
if [[ $VARIABLE == "string" ]]; then
  # commands
fi
```

### Conditions: if, elif, case

In the conditions, it's super important to leave one blank space after the first `[` and one before the `]`.

- `if`

```bash
if [ conditions ]
then
  commands
fi
```

- `elif` (If the condition before this one hasn't matched)

```bash
if [ conditions ]
then
  commands
fi

elif [ conditions ]
then
  commands
fi
```
- `else` (If no condition has matched)
- `case` (It's a Switch)

```bash
var = #some input
case $VARIABLE in
  value1)
    commands
    ;;
  valueN)
    commands
    ;; #Like a Break
  *)
    # This is default value
    # Used when the value of VARIABLE is not valid
    commands
    ;;
esac
```

:warning: In Bash, it's not like C, we have to end all the values with `;;`.

Otherwise, the program will not work.

### Loop: for

```bash
for i in 1 2 3 4 5
do
  echo "Hi for the $i time!"
done
```

Or

```bash
for i in {1..10}
do
  echo "Hi for the $i time!"
done
```

Or

```bash
for (( i=1; i<=10; i++ ))
do
  shell_COMMANDS
done
```

This last one allows for an easy reverse loop.

- `$@` is an array with all the arguments.
- `$#` os the number or passed arguments.
- `$1` Selects the first argument.

### Loop: while/until

```bash
while [ condition ]
do
  command1
  command2
  command3
done
```

```bash
# Similar to while
# Does the loop until the condition is true, then stops.
until [ condition ]
do
  command1
  command2
  command3
done
```

### Functions

```bash
# They are much like in C.
# You have to write the function in the upper part
# and the call to the function at the end.

function FUNCTION_NAME {
  commands
  # commands with parameter:
  echo $1
}

...

# There's no need in supplying parameters if the function doesn't need one
FUNCTION_NAME paratemer1 ... parameterN
```

### Traps

A trap is a function to modify the program behaviour based on user keyboard combinations.

i.e: When you pulse `Ctrl + C` the program usually aborts, that's because the Operative System sends a `SIGINT` signal to make it abort if it was a `SIGKILL` it would actually assassinate the program in the act without letting it finish normally. Well, with a *trap* you can alter that behaviour into calling a function. This has the advantage of doing some cleanup before the program ends for example.
It can also make a call to another function if it detects another type of signal like a `SIGCHLD`, when a child of a parent process has died.

```bash
# Trap for Ctrl + C
trap ctrl_c INT

function ctrl_c(){
  commands when pulsed Ctrl + C
  //The program will finnish after the commands
}
```

## Useful commands

**This command verifies a program is installed in the PC**:

```bash
command -v PROGRAM >/dev/null 2>&1 || {echo >&2 "PROGRAM is not installed. Aborting."; exit 1;}
# Sends the results to null and only return if it's not installed.
# This could be modified to ask to install or whatever.
```

**Verifies if a file or directory exists**.

```bash
FILE=/path/to/file/file.ext
if [ -f "$FILE" ]; then
    echo "$FILE exist."
else
    echo "$FILE doesn't exist."
fi
```

```bash
# If just verifying a file doesn't exists.
FILE==/path/to/file/file.ext
if [ ! -f "$FILE" ]; then
    echo "$FILE doesn't exist."
fi
```

**Parses text of a delimited file (E.G: `*.csv`)**

```bash
FILE="/path/to/file/file.ext"
i=0
while IFS='=' read VALUE1 ... VALUEN
do
      echo "$i value : $VALUE1"
      # ...
      echo "$i value : $VALUEN"
done < $FILE
```

In this fragment of code, we are taking the values of a file delimited by `=` and echoing the values of it.
Instead of echoing them, you can input them into a variable you're going to use later, or else.

E.G: `tea = delicious` then `VALUE1 = tea`, and `VALUE2 = delicious`.

**This command searches for specific words or text in some text:**

```bash
grep ARGUMENT
  -w, --word-regexp         	 match only whole words
  -x, --line-regexp         	 match only whole lines
  -v, --invert-match        	 select non-matching lines
  -m, --max-count=NUM       	 stop after NUM selected lines
  -H, --with-filename       	 print file name with output lines
  -r, --recursive           	 greps also in directories
  -R, --dereference-recursive  also follows all symlinks
  -L, --files-without-match  	 print only names of FILEs with no selected lines
  -l, --files-with-matches  	 print only names of FILEs with selected lines
  -c, --count               	 print only a count of selected lines per FILE
```

I usually use a lot the `-v` and the `-r` arguments. 

**This command cuts text. Useful to select parts of repetitive static information.**

  ```bash
  cut ARGUMENTS
    -b, --bytes=LIST        select only these bytes
    -c, --characters=LIST   select only these characters
    -d, --delimiter=DELIM   use DELIM instead of TAB for field delimiter
    -f, --fields=LIST       select only these fields;  also print any line

  cut -d 1-7 #Will only select the info between character 1 and 7
  ```

***'Awk'* a language for text processing:**

  ```bash
  # Supossing we cat a file and it returns:
  # This is a file
  awk '{print $1}' thatfile.txt
  # Or
  cat thatfile.txt | awk '{print $1}'
  # Will return 'This'
  ```

  ```bash
  # This will return column 2 elements that match the pattern.
  awk ' /'PATTERN'/ {print $2} '
  ```

Awk is very extensive so [this link](https://linuxconfig.org/learning-linux-commands-awk) can be useful for those who wants to learn more. Sed is another very similar program.

## EOF

Here ends the article for now. If while reading this you missed something, contact me and I'll upload it as fast as I can!
